---
title: "Rust For Noobs - 05"
date: 2023-09-08T4:30:00+05:30
author: "Anant Narayan"
weight: 5
showToc: true
TocOpen: false
draft: false
hidemeta: false
disableHLJS: false
disableShare: true
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: false
ShowBreadCrumbs: false
ShowPostNavLinks: true
ShowWordCount: true
UseHugoToc: true
ShowReadingTime: true
---

A complete guide to get started with Rust - Part 5

<!--more-->

In this part, we're going to look at how we can structure our Rust project.

## Project Structure
Currently the structure of our project looks like this:
```text
.
├── Cargo.toml
└── src
   └── main.rs
```
We have our `main` function all the rest of the functions in the `main.rs` file. In a real world project, you would never do this. You'd place different functions in files. This makes it easier to manage a project and also reduces the clutter of our code. Let's see how we can do this in Rust.

First, we'll create a file named `functions.rs` next to our `main.rs` file. Next, we'll copy the `get_area` function, which we created in part - 3. Now `functions.rs` looks like this:
```rust
fn get_area(length: i32, breadth: i32) -> i32 {
    length * breadth
}
```
If you try compiling our code, it won't compile. It'll give this error:
```text
 --> src/main.rs:2:13
  |
2 |     let area = get_area(14, 6);
  |                ^^^^^^^^ not found in this scope
```
That's because we have imported this function. In C/C++, you'd use `#include` to import it. Well, we can do something similar in Rust, using the `use` keyword. We can import the entire file or just a specific function, like this:
```
use functions::get_area;
```
This should work right? Well, not quite. Yes, we are importing the function, but Rust doesn't know what `functions` is or what it points to. To tell the Rust compiler to look into the `functions.rs` file, we need to define it as a **module**. We can do that using the `mod` keyword. Put this line before the `use` statement:
```rust
mod functions;
```
We are not done just yet. Currently, our `get_area` function is ***private***, meaning we can only call and access it from the `functions.rs` file. If we want to access it from other files, we need to make it ***public***. We can do this using the `pub` keyword, like this:
```rust
pub fn get_area(...) {}
```
Now if we compile our program, it should print the correct output. This is great! We can now create a new file and put all our functions in that. But sometimes you'll have a lot of these files and the `src` folder can get pretty cluttered. So you'd probably want to make a new folder like `libs` and put all the files in that. Lets see how we can do that.

Create a new directory and then move our `functions.rs` file to that. But our code won't compile just yet, cause as before we need to tell the compiler that the `libs` file contains our module. To do that, there are two ways, either you can make a `mod.rs` file in `libs` (this is more idiomatic, and I recommend doing it like this) or you can create a file next to `main.rs` named `libs.rs` or the name of your folder. Let's do this. Create a `mod.rs` file in `libs` and add the following code:
```rust
pub mod functions;
```
Now in `main.rs`, change the line which says `mod functions;` to
```rust
mod libs;
```
Now our code should compile like before. That's the basic of how to structure your project. In the next part we'll look at `struct`s in Rust. `:wq`